



The Right to Privacy:
What Does Privacy Really Mean in America?





Albert Shevchuk
Daniel Tomasevich
CSC 300G
Ethics, Communications & Tools for 
Software Development
Fall, 2016
 
INVASION OF PRIVACY: THE RESULT OF A MASSIVE TERRORIST ATTACK
The United States of America is an interesting country when it comes to privacy and the first amendment. It is stated in our constitution that we have freedom of speech, but in reality, freedom of speech is not free because it comes at a cost for some. This strip down of free freedom of speech became evident after one major event. Usually when something big happens; the country reacts to it in a way they think is rational, but others may see it as irrational. An example of this relates to privacy of Americans. The USA Patriot Act was passed after the September 11, 2001 terror attack. Thousands of people were killed and injured because of this incident that occurred in New York at the twin towers. 
This piece of legislation was created to protect our country from experiencing further terrorist attacks, to save lives. However, we know now that it allows for much more than just protecting the country from terrorist attacks. Still to this day, there is debate about whether or not the Patriot Act is a beneficial piece of legislature, but first let’s look at what the Patriot Act really is.

THE USA PATRIOT ACT: BACKGROUND & HISTORY
According to the Department of Justice whose priority is to prevent future terrorist attacks, the USA Patriot Act was created to preserve life and liberty. The real name of the act is Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001 (USA Patriot). The words USA Patriot is merely just an acronym. Some believe this was a tactic the Republican Party used in order to get this law passed, and it worked.  Congress passed the Patriot Act because of bipartisan support. Its goal was to arm law enforcement with new tools to be aware of terrorism and prevent it. The law enforcement agencies were granted permission to use tools that were available for other purposes, but not for them. According to Senator Joe Biden,
“the FBI could get a wiretap to investigate the mafia, but they could not get one to investigate terrorists. To put it bluntly, that was crazy! What's good for the mob should be good for terrorists (U.S).” 
	While the government sees it as a means to ensure protection of our country, other agencies do not. The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) argues that the Patriot Act was passed to make it easier for the government to spy on American citizens. The changes they made to surveillance:
“expanded the authority to monitor phone and email communications, collect bank and credit reporting records, and track the activity of innocent Americans on the internet. While most Americans think, it was created to catch terrorists, the Patriot Act actually turns regular citizens into suspects (@ACLU).” With these definitions of the Patriot Act and purposes of it differing, it is certain that there is clear debate about the Patriot Act. 

THE DEBATE
Some argue that the Patriot Act serves in “uniting and strengthening America by providing appropriate tools required to intercept and obstruct terrorism (Ardoin).” Others go to say that it is an infringement on the rights if Americans. John W. Whitehead, an attorney and president of the Rutherfors Institute argues that: 
“This is not freedom. This is a jail cell set against a backdrop of government surveillance, militarized police, SWAT team raids, asset forfeiture, eminent domain, over criminalization, armed surveillance drones, whole body scanners, stop and frisk searches, roving VIPR raids and the like-all of which have been sanctioned by Congress, the White House and the courts-our constitutional freedoms have been steadily chipped away, undermined, eroded, whittled down and generally discarded (Whitehead).”
	A key thing to take away from this is when Whitehead points out the three branches of government being on board for this creation of invasion of privacy through the Patriot Act. We live in a democracy with checks and balances that assures all pieces of legislation are for the benefit of our country. Our government allows for their agencies to have access to private information from anyone and possibly everyone in order to protect our country. The original piece of legislation that stated that its purpose was to protect the country from terrorism seems to have turned to look at regular citizens as possible terrorists as well. So, this means that our democracy is okay with invasion of privacy since it may lead to a greater good that will be discussed later on this paper, but first let’s turn to one major concern. If the government truly believes that invading people’s privacy is the ethical thing to do for the benefit of society, why do they keep secrets from us?

CITIZENFOUR: TELLING THE SECRETS
After watching a documentary about Edward Snowden and his actions of leaked “top government secrets” I experienced mixed feeling about this country. I wondered if the lies our country made were honestly for the greater good. Was it morally correct for Snowden to make such private documents public? Was it ethical for the government to try to hunt down Snowden and consider him a criminal? Who was right, who was wrong?
As a whistleblower, Snowden was able to make the people aware of how the National Security Agency and other similar agencies were tapping into people’s private conversations/information. There is no real privacy according to Snowden because the government took drastic measures to make sure there were no stones unturned after the 9/11 incident. In the Citizenfour documentary, the NSA director lied about them spying on people’s conversations and private information. 
In the court case highlighted in this documentary, Jewel v. NSA, AT&T customers took the NSA to court because their communication was acquired by the government. The government representative was arguing for the case to be resolved in the government branches and not in the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals where it was taking place. The NSA representative kept stating that this case would cause damage to National Security if dealt with at the state level instead of federal level since the NSA is a federal agency (Citizenfour). This was probably the only argument the NSA could make to buy themselves some time to make a better case to defend their actions. 
The safety of our country should be a priority, but it should not be achieved through lies. The NSA should have made the public aware of its actions. People should have been made aware of the process that the NSA was taking. Looking at someone’s personal messages, phone calls, pictures, etc. Is not something that should have been hidden from the public. In addition, the government having a list of possible terrorists and targeting that group of people should be transparent. They should explain why the people on that list are identified as possible terrorists. If in fact it is true what people say about how if you google something related to terrorism, how to make a bomb for example, the NSA can target you, people should be made aware of that so they don’t give in to their inner curiosity of just wanting to know about something. The NSA should be more honest about the methods they use to discover the information they argue helps them ensure the protection of our country. The interesting thing is that the Patriot Act allows for more than just the protection of our country from terrorist attacks.

MORE THAN NATIONAL SECURITY
	In addition to national security, the NSA invading people’s privacy has also had an effect on other causes such as state agency hiring and the alternative system of justice. One source states that:
“Once on Facebook, an officer searched the man’s friends list and the lawbreaker he was looking for. The first man received a $145 ticket for public urination; the other received a $195 ticket for obstructing justice. Additionally, the USA Patriot Act allows for state agencies to bypass privacy settings on Facebook in order to look up potential employees (Debatin).” 
This statement is also supported by the many stories on broadcast that show that someone was arrested for having some kind of information that led to some illegal activity. If state agencies and federal agencies have access to private information when looking to hire employees or current employees, is that an infringement of our civil liberties? Social media was created for individuals to express themselves in ways they choose, it’s freedom of speech and should not be invaded for non-legitimate purposes such as hiring in state agencies. It seems like this information only benefits the agency and potentially hurts the individual that is the potential or current employee. While this is part of the negatives to having the NSA spy on us and the Patriot Act giving more leeway for the infringement on privacy, there are some causes that definitely have a benefit to society.  
In Janus’ article, he argues that the paradigm of governments control of society has shifted to the preventative state. This means that the government is able to identify dangerous people before they even commit a crime or repeat a crime. For some case, that is a huge benefit to society. At first, I did not see why the Patriot Act and the NSA spying on individuals was beneficial. That changed when I came across this article and other likeminded ones that talked about child molesters and how they are able to track them by pictures they have on their computer. 
” Sexual predator laws provide a model for undercutting these constitutional protections for liberty. The laws undercut these key bulwarks, and allow the establishment of an expansive alternate and degraded system of justice, in which radical prevention prevails at the expense of liberty. Sexual predator laws do this by re-introducing and re-legitimizing the concept of the degraded "other." Membership in this outsider group is then used to rationalize a degraded system of justice, in which the normal protections of the Constitution do not apply. The push for prevention in the sexual predator legislation has nearly unanimous political support (Janus).”
This article goes on to talk about how even when a sexual predator changes their IP address, their identity, uses a website that transfers their page from server to server to try to erase their trace, law enforcement can track them down using the tools made available to them because of the Patriot Act. It also provides a description of the use of certain satellites that use three area circles to target where the sexual predator is targeted in order to capture them and prevent more harm.
For those types of crimes, sometimes more is needed. Dinh’s article goes on to say that the “Otter Amendment” to the Patriot Act allows for law enforcement to work faster and bypass a court warrant if there is:
“adverse result, such as endangering the life or physical safety of an individual, flight from prosecution, evidence tampering, witness intimidation, or seriously jeopardizing an investigation (Dinh).”
This goes to show that not only does the government spy on us, but they also have the right to not wait for a court order to make the move they see is ideal for the situation. This is beneficial for those cases where there truly is a risk of harm to a person, especially when it is a child that is in danger because of a sexual predator, but it still raises concern about the risk of having the wrong person in focus. For example, if someone else is using the phone of an individual to make predatory moves, the individual who owns the phone could be targeted even though they are not the actual criminal. It seems like in today’s world the government and every other organization is always watching their back and choosing to be more safe than sorry.

MY PERSPECTIVE: SO MUCH HAS CHANGED
Before the terrorist attack of 9/11, I was around 9 years old. I remember flying with my parents when immigrating to the United States from Russia. During our flight, I remember having the chance to see the cockpit of the Boeing 747 airplane we were flying in. I was invited by the crew up front to go in and see it for myself. A youngster I was, always interested in airplanes. The pilot would switch his gear into Auto-Pilot and let me sit behind the controls and seize the flight stick. It all seemed interesting at the time. Boy I had the experience of my life because now in 2016 all I see is huge metal doors protecting the pilots from its passengers and staff. I wonder how much weight that thing adds to the plane itself. Perhaps this is why most jet airline companies have changed the luggage weight capacity from 50 kilograms to 25. There are so many fewer opportunities now than there were prior to 2001. Simple things like being able to see the cockpit of the plane you are flying in are no longer possible. Of course, we have not had a major terrorist attack since, but sometimes it feels like the government is not targeting the right people. 
Online privacy in the twenty first century is in high governmental control. Social media has unwound over the last decade and made communications an ease for the general public. Everything from job referencing to dating can be easily achieved with a few megabytes of data. Yet some people are still afraid of posting their ideas and thoughts in fear of criticism or arrests by local authority agencies. The government has the right to invade our privacy and bend the 1st amendment in the Bill of rights of the Constitution, but it seems like the people they should be targeting that do actually post their radical ideas and thoughts on social media are not being identified before tragedy hits.
I am referring to all the terror crimes in the country made often by young white males. Currently in the news they have shown that Dylan Roof, the shooter at a Charleston church has been sentenced for life or may get the death penalty. The evidence against him includes some electronic and some physical along with the obvious crime he committed. Where this topic of invasion of privacy goes into play is when they state that Dylan had posted things on social media that would be of concern. There were no references to the actual post, but they did state how he was open about feeling that African American people are all animals (Hersher). If he did post this on his social media, why was he not targeted as a terrorist? It often seems like just because of how someone looks, they are labeled as either terrorist or not. Even though I technically considered a young white male in America, I would argue that the NSA and government agencies should not give the benefit to white males and should pay close attention to their social media posts.  These cases are more important than letting government agencies look at their potential or current employees’ posts. 

CONCLUSION: 
Privacy does not mean much in America. It is a word used to make individuals feel like they do in fact have freedom of speech and can express themselves without being judged. As explained in this paper, after one major terrorist attack, the Twin Tower terrorist attack in 2001, privacy no longer existed. Citizen four made us realize that there was much more to the Patriot Act that its core goal of protecting the country from terrorist. The government has access to a lot of our information that many consider private. Private in America means that your information is not made public to everyone, but certain government agencies do have access to it. 
   
 
Works Cited
@ACLU. "Surveillance Under the Patriot Act." American Civil Liberties Union. American Civil Liberties Union, 2016. Web. 16 Dec. 2016.

Ardoin, Phillip J., Dr. "Department of Government and Justice Studies." The USA Patriot Act. Appalachian State University, 1 Feb. 2016. Web. 17 Oct. 2016.

Citizenfour. Dir. Laura Poitras. Perf. Edward J Snowden. Citizenfour. ?HBO Films?, 24 Oct. 2014. Web. 10 Dec. 2016. Citizenfour is a 2014 documentary film directed by Laura Poitras, concerning Edward Snowden and the NSA spying scandal

Debatin, B., Lovejoy, J. P., Horn, A.-K. and Hughes, B. N. (2009), Facebook and Online Privacy: Attitudes, Behaviors, and Unintended Consequences. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 15: 83–108. doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2009.01494.x

Dinh, Viet D. 2004. How the USA Patriot Act Defends Democracy. The Georgetown Journal of Law & Public Policy. Lexis Nexis.

Hersher, Rebecca. "Jury Finds Dylann Roof Guilty In S.C. Church Shooting." NPR. NPR, 15 Dec. 2016. Web. 16 Dec. 2016.

Janus, Eric S., The Preventive State, Terrorists and Sexual Predators: Countering the Threat of a New Outsider Jurisprudence. William Mitchell Legal Studies Research Paper No. 11. Available at SSRN:

Sales, Nathan A. "The Patriot Act Is a Vital Weapon in Fighting Terrorism ..." The New York Times. N.p., 23 May 2014. Web. 17 Oct. 2016.
U.S. Department of Justice. "What Is the USA Patriot Web." What Is the USA Patriot Web. United States Government, 18 Aug. 2016. Web. 16 Dec. 2016

Whitehead, John W. "The Tyranny Of 9/11." The Huffington Post. TheHuffingtonPost.com, 07 Aug. 2016. Web. 17 Oct. 2016.3- 







